feat: add `ndarray/base/where` (#10659)
stdlib-js/stdlib: lib/node_modules/@stdlib/ndarray/base/where/README.md

<!--

@license Apache-2.0

Copyright (c) 2026 The Stdlib Authors.

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.

-->

# Where

> > Applies a condition to elements in two input ndarrays and assigns results to elements in an output ndarray.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Apply a condition to elements in two input ndarrays and assign results to elements in an output ndarray.
```
Use imperative tone in intro

var N = 10;
var shape = [ 5, 2 ];
var condition = {
    'dtype': 'uint8',
    'data': filledarrayBy( N, 'uint8', bernoulli( 0.5 ) ),
    'shape': shape,
    'strides': [ 2, 1 ],
    'offset': 0,
    'order': 'row-major'
};
var x = {
    'dtype': 'generic',
    'data': filledarrayBy( N, 'generic', discreteUniform( 0, 100 ) ),
    'shape': shape,
    'strides': [ 2, 1 ],
    'offset': 0,
    'order': 'row-major'
};
var y = {
    'dtype': 'generic',
    'data': filledarrayBy( N, 'generic', discreteUniform( -100, 0 ) ),
    'shape': shape,
    'strides': [ 2, 1 ],
    'offset': 0,
    'order': 'row-major'
};
var out = {
    'dtype': 'generic',
    'data': filledarray( 0, N, 'generic' ),
    'shape': shape.slice(),
    'strides': shape2strides( shape, 'column-major' ),
    'offset': 0,
    'order': 'column-major'
};

where( [ condition, x, y, out ] );

console.log( ndarray2array( condition.data, condition.shape, condition.strides, condition.offset, condition.order ) ); // eslint-disable-line max-len
console.log( ndarray2array( x.data, x.shape, x.strides, x.offset, x.order ) );
console.log( ndarray2array( y.data, y.shape, y.strides, y.offset, y.order ) );

> console.log( ndarray2array( out.data, out.shape, out.strides, out.offset, out.order ) ); // eslint-disable-line max-len

Reviewer: Instead of having all the logs at the end, follow '@stdlib/ndarray/base/binary', its much cleaner. Same goes for `examples/index.js`

var ybuf = new Float64Array( [ -1.0, -2.0, -3.0, -4.0, -5.0, -6.0 ] );
var obuf = new Float64Array( 6 );

// Define the shape of the input and output arrays:
var shape = [ 3, 1, 2 ];

// Define the array strides:
var sc = [ 2, 2, 1 ];
var sx = [ 2, 2, 1 ];
var sy = [ 2, 2, 1 ];
var so = [ 2, 2, 1 ];

// Define the index offsets:
var oc = 0;
var ox = 0;
var oy = 0;
var oo = 0;

// Create the input and output ndarrays:
var condition = {
    'dtype': 'uint8',
    'data': cbuf,
    'shape': shape,
    'strides': sc,
    'offset': oc,
    'order': 'row-major'
};
var x = {
    'dtype': 'float64',
    'data': xbuf,
    'shape': shape,
    'strides': sx,
    'offset': ox,
    'order': 'row-major'
};
var y = {
    'dtype': 'float64',
    'data': ybuf,
    'shape': shape,
    'strides': sy,
    'offset': oy,
    'order': 'row-major'
};
var out = {
    'dtype': 'float64',
    'data': obuf,
    'shape': shape,
    'strides': so,
    'offset': oo,
    'order': 'row-major'
};

// Apply the condition:
where( [ condition, x, y, out ] );

console.log( out.data );
// => <Float64Array>[ 1.0, -2.0, -3.0, 4.0, -5.0, 6.0 ]
```

The function accepts the following arguments:

> -   **arrays**: array-like object containing three input ndarrays and one output ndarray.

Reviewer: Not sure if this is okay since in the main description 'a condition' and 'two input ndarrays' is used.

Reviewer: If you decide to change, it would apply to `repl` and `index.d.ts` file as well.

Each provided ndarray should be an object with the following properties:

-   **dtype**: data type.
-   **data**: data buffer.
-   **shape**: dimensions.
-   **strides**: stride lengths.
-   **offset**: index offset.
-   **order**: specifies whether an ndarray is row-major (C-style) or column major (Fortran-style).

</section>

<!-- /.usage -->

<section class="notes">

## Notes

-   `condition` ndarray must be a `boolean` or `uint8` ndarray.
-   `condition`, `x`, `y`, and `out` ndarrays must have the same shape.

> -   The function **mutates** the input ndarrays shapes and strides if necessary.

Reviewer: This not is not correct. `ndarray2object` creates internal copies, meaning the original input ndarrays are _not_ mutated. This should be removed from here and other files as well.

var xbuf = new Float64Array( [ 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, 5.0, 6.0, 7.0, 8.0, 9.0, 10.0, 11.0, 12.0 ] );
var ybuf = new Float64Array( [ -1.0, -2.0, -3.0, -4.0, -5.0, -6.0, -7.0, -8.0, -9.0, -10.0, -11.0, -12.0 ] );
var obuf = new Float64Array( 6 );

// Define the shape of the input and output arrays:
var shape = [ 3, 1, 2 ];

// Define the array strides:
var sc = [ 4, 4, 1 ];
var sx = [ 4, 4, 1 ];
var sy = [ 4, 4, 1 ];
var so = [ 2, 2, 1 ];

// Define the index offsets:
var oc = 1;
var ox = 1;
var oy = 1;
var oo = 0;

// Create the input and output ndarrays:
var condition = {
    'dtype': 'uint8',
    'data': cbuf,
    'shape': shape,
    'strides': sc,
    'offset': oc,
    'order': 'row-major'
};
var x = {
    'dtype': 'float64',
    'data': xbuf,
    'shape': shape,
    'strides': sx,
    'offset': ox,
    'order': 'row-major'
};
var y = {
    'dtype': 'float64',
    'data': ybuf,
    'shape': shape,
    'strides': sy,
    'offset': oy,
    'order': 'row-major'
};
var out = {
    'dtype': 'float64',
    'data': obuf,
    'shape': shape,
    'strides': so,
    'offset': oo,
    'order': 'row-major'
};

// Apply the condition:

> where( [ condition, x, y, out ] );

Reviewer: @LoayAhmed304 It's better to use `contiguous` arrays in this example. Otherwise, the reader has to mentally compute which elements are accessed.

Also, why does the `condition` have to be the first ndarray? why does have to be named `condition`? 

You need to be consistent with `stdlib` conventions. You can use `ndarray/base/ternary` as a reference. This likely applies to other files as well.

Reviewer 2: @headlessNode See https://data-apis.org/array-api/latest/API_specification/generated/array_api.where.html.

Reviewer 2: ^^^ Condition is the first array per the Array API specification.

Reviewer: @kgryte IMO this approach doesn't line up with either `stdlib` or the Array API standard. The Array API version of `where` takes three separate arguments: `where(condition, x1, x2)` whereas `ndarray/base/*` functions are like so `ternary( [ x, y, z, w ] )`.

I'd say keep `ndarray/base/where` something like `where( [ x, y, c, o ] )` (names can vary), and have the user-facing `ndarray/where` follow the Array API Standard `where( condition, x1, x2 )`. That way, we stay consistent with both.

Reviewer 2: @headlessNode I guess I am not following why `[ condition, x, y, out ]` is somehow inconsistent. `condition` isn't an auxiliary ndarray, such as sort order, etc. You could simply rename `condition => x`, `x => y`, and `y => z`, and you'd get your desired naming scheme. I suppose I am not seeing why the condition array shouldn't be the first ndarray. And the reason for it being named "condition" is that is what it behaviorally does.

In general, it is fine if an API semantically has different argument names than the underlying kernel package. `ternary` could have just as well called them `x1`, `x2`, `x3`, `x4`. So I am not quite understanding the consistency argument here and where the confusion would arise.

Reviewer: @kgryte `condition` not being auxiliary didn't cross my mind. And aside from the Array Api Standard the first array being `condition` makes more sense if we think about it like so: "where condition, choose x else y".

Author: @headlessNode Regarding the `contiguous` arrays, I used such example(s) referencing to [`assign` example](https://github.com/stdlib-js/stdlib/blob/ae72f8e7910cbfd1a0204bedd7f46bff23c74aa0/lib/node_modules/%40stdlib/ndarray/base/assign/README.md?plain=1#L56), I can update this and other examples if needed.

Reviewer: I'd use a simpler example here but it's not a hard requirement.

Author: Sure. On it.
